A Discourse on the Confession of Harmful Deeds
Spoken by Yama Dharmarāja to Karma Chakme

Oṃ. Homage to the great compassionate lord, noble Avalokiteśvara!
om benza gewa chu hung
Oṃ vajra gewa chu1 hūṃ
shik sepé dikpa dakpar shok
May the harmful deed of killing lice be purified.
om benza ya manta ka hung
Oṃ vajra yamāntaka hūṃ
mi sepé dikpa dakpar shok
May the harmful deed of killing human beings be purified.
om benza ro lakha ni tra hung
Oṃ vajra rola khana nitra hūṃ
ta sepé dikpa dakpar shok
May the harmful deed of killing horses be purified.
om benza dza hung ya hung
Oṃ vajra dza hūṃ ya hūṃ
na zöpé dikpa dakpar shok
May the harmful deed of breaking oaths be purified.
om benza sha sha bé ni hung
Oṃ vajra sha sha be ni hūṃ
riwo dang tsuklakhang dang zampa nam mé sekpé dikpa dakpar shok
May the harmful deeds of burning hills, temples and bridges be purified.
om benza bum tri hung hrih hung ka hung
Oṃ vajra bum tri hūṃ hrīḥ hūṃ ka hūṃ
tamché la duk drangpa dang migewa chu jepé dikpa dakpar shok
May the harmful deeds of poisoning others and committing the ten non-virtues be purified.
om benza ya sapa yi sapa ya ni
Oṃ vajra ya sa pa yi sa pa ya ni
bu sepé dikpa dakpar shok
May the harmful deed of killing insects be purified.
om benza si sara yé soha
Oṃ vajra si sa ra ye svāhā
go nor dang ridak dang to lé sepé dikpa dakpar shok
May the harmful deeds of killing livestock, wild animals and baby yaks2 be purified.
om benza sa ta hung
Oṃ vajra satva hūṃ
If you recite this confession of harmful deeds spoken by Yama Dharmarāja (as a message to the
people of the world) three times a day there is no doubt that it will bring freedom from
the sufferings of the lower realms of saṃsāra.

Thus concludes the wish-fulfilling jewel-like confession of harmful deeds which Yama Dharmarāja
spoke to the Karma Chakme.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2016.
↑ dge ba bcu means 'ten virtuous actions'↑ All available editions have *lto le* but the dictionaries
recognise *rto le* as the standard form.